Susan Keating Glaspell was born on July 1, 1876 in Davenport, Iowa to Elmer, who sold hay and animal feed, and his wife Alice. She had two brothers. When she was young, she considered of becoming a teacher but then decided to be a journalist in order to pursue writing.

Glaspell graduated from Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, majoring in philosophy studies, before working for Des Moines Daily News in 1899. While working for the newspaper, she wrote short stories for Youth’s Companion, which were set in Freeport, the fictionalized version of Davenport.

Glaspell had published her own short story anthology, Lifted Masks and two novels, The Glory of the Conquered and The Visioning. After the publication of her second novel, she tied the knot with George Cram Cook, and the two them found Provincetown Players in 1916, which was originated in Provincetown, Massachusetts. Nicknamed “the Little Theatre”, the theatre group was then moved to Greenwich Village in New York under the influence of Eugene O’Neill, a playwright whose was also a friend of the couple.

Glaspell started writing plays for the theatre group, and also her third novel, Fidelity (1915) which was considered her most successful work ever published. She wrote 50 short stories, nine novels, 14 plays and a biography. Among her plays were Trifles (1916), a one-act play about a murder in Midwestern America, Suppressed Desires (1915), a play that satirizes the Freudian views of their Greenwich Village peers, and The Outside(1917), which discusses the value of life through the interaction of two old women. Among her long-form plays were Inheritors (1921), which deals with issues of free speech at a Midwestern university, and The Verge (1922), which discusses the inner state of Claire, an intelligent woman who rejects the limits of everyday life. Most of her novels became best-sellers, with one of them, Brook Evans (1928) was then made into a movie.

Glaspell had been awarded literary prizes, including Pulitzer Prize for her play Alison’s House and the Literary Guild Book of the Month in 1940 for her novel The Morning is Near Us (1939). She passed away on July 27, 1948, due to a pulmonary embolism.


Sources
About Susan Glaspell http://blogs.shu.edu/glaspellsociety/sample-page/
Biography of Susan Glaspell http://www.gradesaver.com/author/susan-glaspell/


Note:

This post was originally posted on Literati, an assignment blog for BBL3406 Poetry and Drama subject, dated Nov 9, 2013. Link here: http://raweinurulain.blogspot.com/2013/11/about-susan-glaspell-review-on-major.html
