Art, in general, and literature, to be specific, are not just universal. They are also multi-purpose that they can even be applied to spread the messages of patriotism and war to the people.

Patriotism means “love towards one’s ancestry, culture or homeland, and the willingness to sacrifice for it”. This is where literature is needed to cultivate the importance of being patriotic into the readers’ minds. We will take a look at Rupert Brooke’s poem “The Soldier” (1914).

If I should die, think only this of me:
That there’s some corner of a foreign field
That is for ever England. There shall be
In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam;
A body of England’s, breathing English air,
Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.

And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness,
In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.

This poem is one of the war-themed poems that supports the idea of patriotism, which expressed the love of the country and portrayed the war in a positive way. It could be (literally) a manifesto to persuade the young Englishmen to join the British army and sacrifice themselves in the name of their King, since England was ruled by King George V.

However, as the World War 1 started to be intense, the ugliness of war had been shown through so many images of deaths, loss, and devastation. Wilfred Owen’s “Dulce et Decorum Est” (1917) proved to be an example of the horrifying truth about the war.

Bent double, like old beggars under sacks,
Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge,
Till on the haunting flares we turned our backs,
And towards our distant rest began to trudge.
Men marched asleep. Many had lost their boots,
But limped on, blood-shod. All went lame; all blind;
Drunk with fatigue; deaf even to the hoots
Of gas-shells dropping softly behind.

Gas! GAS! Quick, boys!—An ecstasy of fumbling
Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time,
But someone still was yelling out and stumbling
And flound’ring like a man in fire or lime.
—Dim through the misty panes and thick green light,
As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.

In all my dreams before my helpless sight,
He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning.

If in some smothering dreams, you too could pace
Behind the wagon that we flung him in,
And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,
His hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin;
If you could hear, at every jolt, the blood
Come gargling from the froth-corrupted lungs,
Obscene as cancer, bitter as the cud
Of vile, incurable sores on innocent tongues,
—My friend, you would not tell with such high zest
To children ardent for some desperate glory,
The old Lie: Dulce et decorum est
Pro patria mori.

According to the British Library, ‘Dulce et Decorum Est’ tells us about a mustard gas attack on a group of war-weary soldiers. Owen’s painfully direct language combines gritty realism with an aching sense of compassion. His despair at the crumbling of the moral order – the world’s and perhaps his own – are expressed in phrases such as “froth-corrupted lungs’, “sores on innocent tongues” and his description of the dying man’s face “like a devil’s sick of sin”. the last two lines of the poem bears this meaning:  ‘it is sweet and fitting to die for one’s country’. It was Homer’s famous quote that glorified the act of dying for the country as “sweet”, yet what Owen showed how the war was like to the readers is rather different and negative.

On the contrary to Brooke’s, Owen’s makes us ponder if it is worth it for us to go through the dark side of war such as pain and trauma just for the sake of our country. In my opinion, I would choose Owen’s as the most suitable literary work if I want to tell the people the side effects of war and that war is nothing but gore, anger and disappointment.


Note:

This post was originally posted on Literati; an assignment blog for BBL3406 Poetry and Drama subject, dated Oct 13, 2013. Link here: http://raweinurulain.blogspot.com/2013/10/war-poems.html
